A river is a natural flowing watercourse, usually freshwater, flowing towards an ocean, sea, lake or another river.
In some cases, a river flows into the ground and becomes dry at the end of its course without reaching another body of water.
Small rivers can be referred to using names such as creek, brook, rivulet, and rill.
There are no official definitions for the generic term river as applied to geographic features, although in some countries or communities a stream is defined by its size.
Many names for small rivers are specific to geographic location; examples are "run" in some parts of the United States, "burn" in Scotland and northeast England, and "beck" in northern England.
Sometimes a river is defined as being larger than a creek, but not always: the language is vague

Rivers are part of the water cycle. Water generally collects in a river from precipitation through a drainage basin from surface runoff and other sources such as groundwater recharge, springs, and the release of stored water in natural ice and snowpacks.

Rivers are often considered major features within a landscape; however, they actually only cover around 0.1% of the land on Earth.
They are made more obvious and significant to humans since many human cities and civilizations are built around the freshwater supplied by rivers and streams.
Most of the major cities of the world are situated on the banks of rivers, as they are, or were, used as a source of water, for obtaining food, for transport, as borders, as a defensive measure, as a source of hydropower to drive machinery, for bathing, and as a means of disposing of waste.
In the pre-industrial era, larger rivers were a major obstruction to the movement of people, goods, and armies across them.
Towns often developed at the few locations they could be crossed.
Many major cities such as London are located at the lowest point at which a river could be bridged.

A stream is a continuous body of surface water flowing within the bed and banks of a channel.
Depending on its location or certain characteristics, a stream may be referred to by a variety of local or regional names.
Long large streams are usually called rivers, while smaller, less voluminous and more intermittent streams are known as streamlets, brooks or creeks.

A stream smaller than a creek, especially one that is fed by a spring or seep. It is usually small and easily forded. A brook is characterised by its shallowness.

A lake is an area filled with water, localized in a basin, surrounded by land, and distinct from any river or other outlet that serves to feed or drain the lake.
Lakes lie on land and are not part of the ocean, although, like the much larger oceans, they do form part of the Earth's water cycle.
Lakes are distinct from lagoons, which are generally coastal parts of the ocean.
Lakes are typically larger and deeper than ponds, which also lie on land, though there are no official or scientific definitions.
Lakes can be contrasted with rivers or streams, which usually flow in a channel on land.
Most lakes are fed and drained by rivers and streams.

An ocean can also refer to any of the large bodies of water into which the world ocean is conventionally divided.
The ocean is the principal component of Earth's hydrosphere, and therefore integral to life on Earth.
Acting as a huge heat reservoir, the ocean influences climate and weather patterns, the carbon cycle, and the water cycle.
The terms "the ocean" or "the sea" used without specification refer to the interconnected body of salt water covering the majority of the Earth's surface.
It includes the Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, Southern and Arctic Oceans.
As a general term, "the ocean" and "the sea" are often interchangeable, although speakers of British English refer to "the sea" in all cases, even when the body of water is one of the oceans.

Strictly speaking, a "sea" is a body of water (generally a division of the world ocean) partly or fully enclosed by land.
The word "sea" can also be used for many specific, much smaller bodies of seawater, such as the North Sea or the Red Sea.
There is no sharp distinction between seas and oceans, though generally seas are smaller, and are often partly (as marginal seas) or wholly (as inland seas) bordered by land.